README.rst, before:

Timezone
========

Arduino library to support local/UTC time conversions using rules

See :sample:`SystemClock_NTP` for example usage.

Port of https://github.com/JChristensen/Timezone for Sming.


2024 Revision
-------------

Sming support for dates and times is via the :cpp:class:`DateTime` and :cpp:class:`SystemClockClass` classes.

Applications may need support for local time for example when updating integrated displays.
The system clock is maintained in UTC, but can provide local time provided the appropriate offset is
set via :cpp:func:`SystemClockClass::setTimeZoneOffset`.

.. note::
   
   Applications with web interfaces would normally deal with local time conversions in script.
   Web browsers have access to full time zone information e.g. via local IANA database (see below).

The clock itself can best be kept correct using NTP.
However, keeping the timezone offset correct is another matter.

The standard C library provides support for time conversions but using those from C++ code is clunky
and error-prone.

Also, `rules change <https://www.timeanddate.com/time/europe/eu-dst.html>`__.
Not often, but nowadays users expect systems to take care of this stuff itself.
But it can be complicated!
The easiest solution is just to let the user change the time (offset) manually if needed - always a good idea.

This library aims to improve the handling of timezones in the following ways:

-  Supporting setting the local timezone using a local identifier, such as ``TZ::Europe::London``.
-  Integrate with the standard C library calls to accommodate any existing code which may use them.
-  Ensure local time is always correct when queried via :cpp:method:`SystemClockClass::now()`,
   taking care of daylight savings changes for the selected timezone.
-  Allowing more comprehensive timezone support using a compact timezone database.
   This allows applications to provide menus for selecting timezones, etc.
   Note that this could also be accomplished by retrieving the database information from remote servers
   since it's generally only required during configuration or setup.
-  Support automatic updates to tiemzone rules. IANA publishes these in advance of the changes
   so user intervention should not be required.



IANA database
-------------

This library has been extended to include timezone descriptions from the
`IANA database <https://www.iana.org/time-zones>`__.

The rules for timezones and daylight savings are complex historically and can change at any time.
However, embedded applications rarely require a complete, historical timezone database.
There are exceptions of course
https://www.haraldkreuzer.net/en/news/esp32-library-offline-time-zone-search-given-gps-coordinates.

More likely is the requirement to display current local time.
This sort of thing might be conveniently held in a configuration file so if the rules change
it's easy to fix.

This is one big rabbit hole which sane people should probably avoid.
But here's a few tidbits you might find useful.


Data format
-----------

The primary source files in the IANA database are:

   africa
   antarctica
   asia
   australasia
   backward
   backzone
   calendars
   etcetera
   europe
   factory
   northamerica
   southamerica

These contain lots of historical notes including rules and zone definitions.
The format is described in ``zic.8.txt``.

The ``tzdata.zi`` file contains a compact version of this same information,
excluding comments and with abbreviated rule names.
It is therefore a bit simpler to parse, can be more easily updated in the future
and is the one ``tools/tzinfo.py`` uses.


POSIX timezone strings
----------------------

These provide a compact representation of a timezone.
For example, ``Europe/London`` has a timezone string of ``GMT0BST,M3.5.0/1,M10.5.0``,
and ``Pacific/Gambier`` is ``<-09>9``.

These are the strings which C library functions use to convert between local and UTC times::

   setenv("GMT0BST,M3.5.0/1,M10.5.0");
   tzset();

Functions like ``mktime`` and ``localtime`` will then produce the expected results.

.. note::

   On a desktop computer you can pass the name of a system timezone file,
   or a string such as ":Pacific/Auckland".
   These refer to binary files found in release builds of the IANA database
   and produce accurate results for historical and future dates.

Whilst it's fine for library code to use these in their implementations, it's something applications
should avoid:

   - They're not intuitive
   - They're error prone
   - They can introduce unexpected code/data bloat
   - By themselves, they don't take account of rule changes (you'd need multiple strings)
   - I'm using C++ dammit.


IANA says this:

   In POSIX.1-2017, time display in a process is controlled by the environment variable TZ.
   Unfortunately, the POSIX.1-2017 TZ string takes a form that is hard to describe and is
   error-prone in practice.
   Also, POSIX.1-2017 TZ strings cannot deal with daylight saving time rules not based on
   the Gregorian calendar (as in Morocco), or with situations where more than two time zone
   abbreviations or UT offsets are used in an area.

J. Christensen's library is much nicer in this regard since we don't have to do
any string decoding, and it's much clearer what the rules are for conversion.

The only way to ensure embedded applications are reliably portable is to use UTC internally.
Converting that UTC timestamp to a local time is then a simple matter of adding the
appropriate offset. That c:type:`time_t` value can then get passed to :cpp:class:`DateTime`
for display, etc.


Note: For ``Morocco`` read ``Africa/Casablanca`` or ``Africa/El_Aaiun``.


POSIX timezone strings do not correspond exactly with IANA descriptions.
In particular, an IANA rule may say ``Mar Sun>=22`` which gets translated as ``March week4 Sunday``.
This looks like there could be edge cases where the two interpretations are a week apart.
Need a proof for this!


Timezone abbreviations
----------------------

Some timezones do not have formal abbreviations, for which the IANA database uses numeric timecodes.
For example, ``Pacific/Guadalcanal`` has a POSIX time string of "<+11>-11".
However, https://www.timeanddate.com/time/zone/@2108832 uses "SBT".

IANA has this to say:

   Alphabetic time zone abbreviations should not be used as unique identifiers for UT offsets as they
   are ambiguous in practice.
   For example, in English-speaking North America "CST" denotes 6 hours behind UT, but in China it
   denotes 8 hours ahead of UT, and French-speaking North Americans prefer "HNC" to "CST".
   The tz database contains English abbreviations for many timestamps; unfortunately some of these
   abbreviations were merely the database maintainers' inventions, and these have been removed when
   possible.


Useful commands
---------------

List transitions within a range of years::

   zdump -i -c 2024,2040 Europe/London
   zdump -V -c 2024,2040 Europe/London

Generate binary rule data in compact form, up to year 2040::

   zic -r @$(date +%s -d 2024-01-01)/@$(date +%s -d 2040-01-01) -b slim /usr/share/zoneinfo/tzdata.zi -d tmp

Output is in 'tmp'.
This is still more bloaty than we'd like.
For example, ``Europe/London`` has only one rule yet the tzdata is 740 bytes.
The corresponding POSIX rule is 'GMT0BST,M3.5.0/1,M10.5.0'.


Testing
-------

As this is all jolly complicated testing is important.
We certainly want to make sure that transitions are correct and correspond with those reported by
development system libraries.



References
----------

- `Theory and pragmatics of the tz code and data <https://data.iana.org/time-zones/theory.html>`__
- Current text timezone database `tzdata.zi<https://data.iana.org/time-zones/data/tzdata.zi>`
- `LLVM Time Zone Support <https://libcxx.llvm.org/DesignDocs/TimeZone.html>`__


API Documentation
-----------------

.. doxygenclass:: Timezone
   :members:

.. doxygenstruct:: TimeChangeRule
   :members:

.. doxygenenum:: week_t
.. doxygenenum:: dow_t
.. doxygenenum:: month_t

Commit message:

+README notes on storage/updates

README.rst, after:

Timezone
========

Arduino library to support local/UTC time conversions using rules

See :sample:`SystemClock_NTP` for example usage.

Port of https://github.com/JChristensen/Timezone for Sming.


2024 Revision
-------------

Sming support for dates and times is via the :cpp:class:`DateTime` and :cpp:class:`SystemClockClass` classes.

Applications may need support for local time for example when updating integrated displays.
The system clock is maintained in UTC, but can provide local time provided the appropriate offset is
set via :cpp:func:`SystemClockClass::setTimeZoneOffset`.

.. note::
   
   Applications with web interfaces would normally deal with local time conversions in script.
   Web browsers have access to full time zone information e.g. via local IANA database (see below).

The clock itself can best be kept correct using NTP.
However, keeping the timezone offset correct is another matter.

The standard C library provides support for time conversions but using those from C++ code is clunky
and error-prone.

Also, `rules change <https://www.timeanddate.com/time/europe/eu-dst.html>`__.
Not often, but nowadays users expect systems to take care of this stuff itself.
But it can be complicated!
The easiest solution is just to let the user change the time (offset) manually if needed - always a good idea.

This library aims to improve the handling of timezones in the following ways:

-  Supporting setting the local timezone using a local identifier, such as ``TZ::Europe::London``.
-  Integrate with the standard C library calls to accommodate any existing code which may use them.
-  Ensure local time is always correct when queried via :cpp:method:`SystemClockClass::now()`,
   taking care of daylight savings changes for the selected timezone.
-  Allowing more comprehensive timezone support using a compact timezone database.
   This allows applications to provide menus for selecting timezones, etc.
   Note that this could also be accomplished by retrieving the database information from remote servers
   since it's generally only required during configuration or setup.
-  Support automatic updates to tiemzone rules. IANA publishes these in advance of the changes
   so user intervention should not be required.


Storage and updates
-------------------

Hard-coded TZ data is pretty straightforward, useful for simple systems deployed to limited areas.

The full database is best kept on a filing system as it's infrequently accessed.

The core data can all be stored in FWFS: readonly and compact.
Any changes can be stored in a volatile filesystem, directly or as a 'package' in an FWFS image.

There does not appear to be any standard way for propagating these changes.
GNU/Linux, Android, Windows, etc. all have their own mechanisms.
The root data source for these is the IANA database.

.. note::

   The current timezone database is always available via the IANA, but only in source form.
   The most compact source for this is 'tzdata.zi' but requires parsing.

   Compiled versions are more suitable. Here are some sources:

   https://github.com/python/tzdata/tree/master/src/tzdata/zoneinfo
   https://github.com/python/tzdata/raw/master/src/tzdata/zoneinfo/Europe/London

After selecting the timezone(s) of interest, the appropriate data can be fetched and used to determine
the appropriate timezone offsets and when the next changes occur.
When that change happens, the source can be re-queried.


IANA database
-------------

This library has been extended to include timezone descriptions from the
`IANA database <https://www.iana.org/time-zones>`__.

The rules for timezones and daylight savings are complex historically and can change at any time.
However, embedded applications rarely require a complete, historical timezone database.
There are exceptions of course
https://www.haraldkreuzer.net/en/news/esp32-library-offline-time-zone-search-given-gps-coordinates.

More likely is the requirement to display current local time.
This sort of thing might be conveniently held in a configuration file so if the rules change
it's easy to fix.

This is one big rabbit hole which sane people should probably avoid.
But here's a few tidbits you might find useful.


Data format
~~~~~~~~~~~

The primary source files in the IANA database are:

   africa
   antarctica
   asia
   australasia
   backward
   backzone
   calendars
   etcetera
   europe
   factory
   northamerica
   southamerica

These contain lots of historical notes including rules and zone definitions.
The format is described in ``zic.8.txt``.

The ``tzdata.zi`` file contains a compact version of this same information,
excluding comments and with abbreviated rule names.
It is therefore a bit simpler to parse, can be more easily updated in the future
and is the one ``tools/tzinfo.py`` uses.


POSIX timezone strings
----------------------

These provide a compact representation of a timezone.
For example, ``Europe/London`` has a timezone string of ``GMT0BST,M3.5.0/1,M10.5.0``,
and ``Pacific/Gambier`` is ``<-09>9``.

These are the strings which C library functions use to convert between local and UTC times::

   setenv("GMT0BST,M3.5.0/1,M10.5.0");
   tzset();

Functions like ``mktime`` and ``localtime`` will then produce the expected results.

.. note::

   On a desktop computer you can pass the name of a system timezone file,
   or a string such as ":Pacific/Auckland".
   These refer to binary files found in release builds of the IANA database
   and produce accurate results for historical and future dates.

Whilst it's fine for library code to use these in their implementations, it's something applications
should avoid:

   - They're not intuitive
   - They're error prone
   - They can introduce unexpected code/data bloat
   - By themselves, they don't take account of rule changes (you'd need multiple strings)
   - I'm using C++ dammit.


IANA says this:

   In POSIX.1-2017, time display in a process is controlled by the environment variable TZ.
   Unfortunately, the POSIX.1-2017 TZ string takes a form that is hard to describe and is
   error-prone in practice.
   Also, POSIX.1-2017 TZ strings cannot deal with daylight saving time rules not based on
   the Gregorian calendar (as in Morocco), or with situations where more than two time zone
   abbreviations or UT offsets are used in an area.

J. Christensen's library is much nicer in this regard since we don't have to do
any string decoding, and it's much clearer what the rules are for conversion.

The only way to ensure embedded applications are reliably portable is to use UTC internally.
Converting that UTC timestamp to a local time is then a simple matter of adding the
appropriate offset. That c:type:`time_t` value can then get passed to :cpp:class:`DateTime`
for display, etc.


Note: For ``Morocco`` read ``Africa/Casablanca`` or ``Africa/El_Aaiun``.


POSIX timezone strings do not correspond exactly with IANA descriptions.
In particular, an IANA rule may say ``Mar Sun>=22`` which gets translated as ``March week4 Sunday``.
This looks like there could be edge cases where the two interpretations are a week apart.
Need a proof for this!


Timezone abbreviations
----------------------

Some timezones do not have formal abbreviations, for which the IANA database uses numeric timecodes.
For example, ``Pacific/Guadalcanal`` has a POSIX time string of "<+11>-11".
However, https://www.timeanddate.com/time/zone/@2108832 uses "SBT".

IANA has this to say:

   Alphabetic time zone abbreviations should not be used as unique identifiers for UT offsets as they
   are ambiguous in practice.
   For example, in English-speaking North America "CST" denotes 6 hours behind UT, but in China it
   denotes 8 hours ahead of UT, and French-speaking North Americans prefer "HNC" to "CST".
   The tz database contains English abbreviations for many timestamps; unfortunately some of these
   abbreviations were merely the database maintainers' inventions, and these have been removed when
   possible.


Useful commands
---------------

List transitions within a range of years::

   zdump -i -c 2024,2040 Europe/London
   zdump -V -c 2024,2040 Europe/London

Generate binary rule data in compact form, up to year 2040::

   zic -r @$(date +%s -d 2024-01-01)/@$(date +%s -d 2040-01-01) -b slim /usr/share/zoneinfo/tzdata.zi -d tmp

Output is in 'tmp'.
This is still more bloaty than we'd like.
For example, ``Europe/London`` has only one rule yet the tzdata is 740 bytes.
The corresponding POSIX rule is 'GMT0BST,M3.5.0/1,M10.5.0'.


Testing
-------

As this is all jolly complicated testing is important.
We certainly want to make sure that transitions are correct and correspond with those reported by
development system libraries.



References
----------

- `Theory and pragmatics of the tz code and data <https://data.iana.org/time-zones/theory.html>`__
- Current text timezone database `tzdata.zi<https://data.iana.org/time-zones/data/tzdata.zi>`
- `LLVM Time Zone Support <https://libcxx.llvm.org/DesignDocs/TimeZone.html>`__


API Documentation
-----------------

.. doxygenclass:: Timezone
   :members:

.. doxygenstruct:: TimeChangeRule
   :members:

.. doxygenenum:: week_t
.. doxygenenum:: dow_t
.. doxygenenum:: month_t
